{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13120\viewh15560\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 (Attempt 1, abandoned)\
\
An author, writing a textbook for Calculus, can search for ROPE for problems to ensure that the book contains enough practice problems for each section.  The author can then create problem collections on ROPE linked to the textbook: sample problem sets, quizzes and exams that are in line with pedagogical focus of the book.  The author can also create supplemental material to explore topics related to, but not essential to, the focus of the book; for example, a series of linked problems leading to a sophisticated population model.\
\
Instructors, using the textbook developed through ROPE, can use these extra resources to ensure that assignments are tailored to the class.  If the instructors wants to change the order of instruction, or not cover certain topics, they can search ROPE for problems that require only topics they have covered (optimization problems without exponential functions, integrals without partial fractions, etc.).  If a class is having trouble with a particular concepts, an instructor can find additional problems with a narrow focus (chain rule derivatives with trigonometric functions).\
\
<<<METADATA>>>\
\
Students can use ROPE via assignment from their textbook or instructor (outlined above), or can use ROPE on their own to bolster their own understanding of the subject.  \
\
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%\
\
(Attempt 2)\
\
An author writing a textbook for Linear Algebra, and finds that she needs more problems on solving equations with parametrized solutions.  She can search ROPE for highly-rated computational problems on solving a system of equations, and can check the solutions to see that the numbers work out nicely.  In her searches she finds that there are relatively few problems where the system of equations has no solutions, so she adds a few of her own to the database.  She also adds a collection of problems she likes that builds to a project modeling traffic flow, and puts a link to the collection in her book.\
\
An instructor chooses the author's Linear Algebra textbook because of the copious practice problems provided.  However, the instructor likes to focus more on linear transformations than the book does, so he uses ROPE to find more problems dealing with transformations and geometry, including a nice series of problems on the mechanics of robotic arms.  The instructor also uses ROPE to find problems with simple computations for his weekly quizzes.\
\
A student in the instructor's class finds she is having trouble understanding how deal with changing the basis of a vector space.  She uses ROPE to find examples of problems with change-of-basis matrices and vector spaces other than $\{\\bf R\}^n$, and works through the solutions until she feels she has mastered the material.  She notices that one of her practice problems is part of a larger collection of problems on taxicab geometry, and goes through the rest of the collection.\
\
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%\
\
(Attempt 3, short)\
\
ROPE can affect all aspects of a class: the author of the textbook can use ROPE to find high-quality problems for the text and provide additional linked content for classes using the book; the instructor can use ROPE to find additional homework, exam, and quiz problems, as well as worksheets on topics outside the scope of the text; the student can use ROPE to find additional problems and worked solutions on topics that are not fully understood.}