The Resource of Open Problems for Education (ROPE) will address a current
need in undergraduate mathematics education: the need for a
widely-available source of high-quality, well documented problems that
instructors can use in a variety of educational venues.  Much of the
learning that takes place in mathematics is driven by students' work, and
the success of that learning is fundamentally dependent on the types of
problems on which they work.  ROPE will provide a resource that will be
free and open-source, providing problems for users without commercial
entanglements.  Because it will have a powerful search capability, users
will be able to easily find problems that allow them to address their
needs for instruction or learning.  It will allow users to create
collections of problems, and collections of collections.  This capability
will allow many different use-cases: for example, instructors may
construct homework sets, quizzes, and groups of these for entire courses;
or may construct model courses with supporting material that they can then
share with colleagues; etc.  And it will support a community of users who
may contribute problems, content and feedback on problems, and who may
share their work and problem collections with others.  All of these
characteristics, taken in sum, will result in a widely accessible and
useful resource that may have a significant impact on mathematics
education as a whole.
