The proposed project will develop an online, electronic library, the
Resource of Open Problems for Education (ROPE), that will provide many
innovative, well-tested, and documented problems that mathematics that
will be useful in a wide range of courses and assignment types.  Because
working problems is at the heart of student learning and engagement with
mathematics, this will be a tool that may promote student learning and be
of use to authors, instructors and students alike.  Any user will be able
to search ROPE for problems by keyword or by specific subject matter or
characteristics.  Problems will be contributed by the community of users
and will have associated descriptive information that will include user
feedback and comments, as well as statistics on the frequency of the
problem's use.  Users will be able to comment on and rate problems, and
flag them using a commonly understood "endorse" feature (similar to
those used on social networking sites).  They will also be able to create
and share collections of problems, and collections of these collections,
for later use.  These collections may be for specific assignments
(homework, quizzes, worksheets, etc.) and may be collected to describe
problems sets or assignments for entire courses.  ROPE will have passive
and active editorial management, the former by being able to sort search
results by ratings and usage and the latter by the community of users of
ROPE.
